>> Hello, I'm Chantal Westerman.
One of the best parts
of the wisdom workshops
are the up close and
personal conversations
with the leading
practitioners and authors
in the holistic field.
This gives all of
us an opportunity
to know these people
just a little bit better.
So join me as they share
their wisdom with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What a pleasure it is for me
to sit down and talk with you.
>> This is wonderful.
>> Truly a pleasure.
I read your first
book, I believe,
it was the end of 1981.
And I've been reading
them ever since.
You've published
probably 15 books, 16?
>> 17, can you imagine?
>> Wow.
>> I can't imagine.
>> 17 books.
One of the things that struck
me then and still strikes me
today is how we have lost
our sense of tradition,
our sense of ritual.
>> Yes.
>> We've lost it, and your books
always remind me that that is
from whence we came.
One of the things that
strikes me and struck me
in your very first book,
right up to the most recent,
is that we have no
sense of our tradition,
or at least a very
small group of us
recall tradition and
incorporate it into our lives.
Why do we do that?
Why have we lost that?
>> Well, I think there's
so many, many reasons.
We have so many religions
and faiths in this country.
And I think you have
to talk about men
have certain ceremonies
and rituals that they do.
The football games and so
forth are a ritual, in a way.
Women, however, have
lost their ceremonies
and are regaining them.
When I began this work, in 1980,
I published "Medicine Woman."
They thought I was a nurse.
They had never heard
of a medicine woman.
>> A medicine woman.
Nurse.
>> Nurse, of course.
>> Interesting.
>> What hospital do you work at?
And I had to explain that
there is much more to life
than what we see.
And I started
talking about things
that people wouldn't even
approach the subject like they
do today, that how you
are in your body, how
you are physically
is an example,
is a great voice expressing
how you are spiritually.
And if you ask someone how
are you in your body today,
they have to think about it.
They don't understand
that the two relate.
And ceremony and ritual,
which I incidentally think
are two different things--
ritual is something
that you do by rote.
Ceremony is something that you
put something of yourself into,
so that every time you
perform it, it's different.
I have a ceremony, for
instance, that I do every day.
And I meditate a little bit, and
I just simply create a dialogue
with my god, the Great Spirit.
And I'm not a Native
American woman,
but my teachers
have been Native.
And I have had the most
extraordinary lessons
and teachings from these
women that I've prayed with.
>> Are they the same teachers?
You've always been
with the same teachers?
>> I have been with these
extraordinary 43 women from
around the world.
And Agnes Whistling Elk
and Ruby Plenty Chiefs
are the two mentors in my life.
>> Yes, they are the
first names I remember.
>> And they're the ones that I
write about in "Medicine Woman"
and "All The Way Through."
This latest book, which is "The
Love and Power Journal," which
is part of "The Love and Power"
book is kind of a how to book.
My publisher said, now Lynn,
you have to write something
that everybody can understand.
So I wrote a book
called "Love and Power,"
about our passion in our lives.
>> Which was very easily
understood, I thought.
>> And of course, my
passion has been immense.
The immensity of thought,
of this incredible belief
in something that is greater
than ourselves, somehow.
And yet, we're the sum
of its parts, in a way.
All of us create our reality.
And this wonderful
passion that we have
has to be balanced with
the work that we do.
And I think you understand
that as well as anyone,
that there's a passion
in your life for what
is the meaning of this life.
And yet you need
to make a living.
You want to be busy.
You want to be making a
difference in the world.
How do you do those two things
and not lose one for the other?
How do you go to work every
day as a lawyer, in IBM,
or some big corporation
and not lose your soul?
>> How?
>> That's a big order.
Well, I think that you can
bring your spirituality,
and your character, and your
integrity in a spiritual way
into the workplace.
I think you can do that.
And I think you can
do that by becoming
more intimate in a thoughtful
way with the people
that work with you.
After all, everybody's
feeling the same.
I have found that with
working with thousands
of people in the world that
everybody has the same fear.
We all have a fear of death.
Heaven knows we don't want to
talk about death, because we're
afraid of dying more
than we are death.
But everyone has
the fears of being
fired, of not being
able to survive,
of not being able to
express themselves
in the world in
a meaningful way.
Everybody has fears,
terrors about moving
into the new millennium,
for instance.
>> Of course.
>> Everybody I talk to seems
to have fears about this sort
of thing.
>> That's a perfect example,
but how do you change that?
How do you convey to a person,
well, find your own power?
Because you're right.
Most people say, oh, I
had a terrible night.
My dog ran away, and my
boyfriend and I had a fight.
It's easier said than done,
I think, is what I'm saying.
>> Well, it's a way
of communicating.
We have learned to
communicate in that way,
and that then leads us
to a deeper conversation.
But the problem is the deeper
conversation never happens.
So to talk about
that is one thing.
To do something about
it is something else.
>> So what do we do?
>> All of my books are about
finding those lessons within
yourself that help you
find your true self.
How do you do that?
I've written 17
books about that.
It's hard to put
it in one sentence.
>> Of course.
>> But "Low and
Power" talks about it.
It's about balance, and
then it's about mastery.
You can have a technique
that is magnificent.
You can learn the technique
of, let's say, a computer.
But losing your
soul to that means
that you've lost your
passion and your love
for it, because the technique
takes so much of you
that you have no life left.
>> Let me ask you this.
When you find your
true self, hopefully,
through your amazing
books, which quite frankly,
millions of people have--
I'll give you a
little commercial.
It's true.
People find themselves
through your work.
When you find your
true self, do you
find that the people around you
who haven't are drawn to it?
They want what you have?
Is that part of the healing
process in America, today?
>> I think so.
Or they're driven away, because
you provide a mirror that they
can't bear to look in.
And they look at you, and
they're frightened by you,
or they're put off
because they see
that you've been doing work--
>> Fascinating.
>> --that they have
not been doing.
So what did I do about that?
I saw that all over the place,
everywhere I went in the world.
And I thought, I
better start a school,
where people, if
they choose to, can
go very deeply into
the kinds of things
that are so hard to deal with.
You realize, Chantal, a
lot of people in this world
would rather die than change.
They get a disease, and diseases
come for lots of reasons.
There are genetics.
There are biological reasons.
There are reasons
in your environment,
but for the most part, we have
a final teacher in our lives.
And that's our body.
And the body says, I
see that you're not
going to deal with
your problems,
therefore, I'm going to teach
you, in a symbolic sense.
And you produce a
disease in your life.
Now, when you produce a
life threatening disease,
you've got to look at yourself.
You've got to look at the
way that you're living.
The problem is that we don't
know where to go for that.
So I'm just saying that
I dedicated my life,
as many, many wonderful people
have these days, to producing
a school, for instance,
called the Lynn Andrews
School for Sacred Arts
and Creative Living.
And it deals with aesthetics
that we've lost in our lives.
>> Where is your school?
>> It's a correspondence school,
because I realized that we
needed discipline to our own
self-discipline to create
the mirrors that
you need to grow.
>> Of course.
And part of
discipline is writing.
>> Writing, it's artwork.
It's aesthetic things.
You take a drum.
You take your tools.
If you're going to
be a healer-- let's
just say you want to make
a difference in the world,
but you don't know what to do.
You have no idea except that you
have this passion in your soul
and in your heart, and
you're trying in every way.
You can't sit down and
tell people how to live.
It isn't going to
mean anything to them.
They've got to experience that.
One of the first things that
Agnes Whistling Elk ever
told me--
we were sitting in her cabin
in the north of Canada,
and the Aurora Borealis was
outside all over the sky,
like curtains of light.
And we were sitting there
in this amazing place,
and I'm thinking,
what am I doing here?
And she looked at me with
this old, wonderful face--
this great elder person--
and she said, Lynn,
in your world,
you live on borrowed knowledge.
And I said, what do you mean?
And she said, you sit
there listening to people
tell you about their dreams.
But how do you make that
dream part of your life?
>> Good question.
>> Yes.
And I realized that at that
moment she was my teacher.
And she began to teach
me through experience.
And of course, all my books
are about the experiences
that they've taken me
through in Australia,
in Central America, in Tibet,
and Nepal, and so forth.
And it's the experience of life.
Experience the self.
>> Let's get into a topic
that may be a little dicey.
We may get some letters,
but let's be bold here.
Why does it seem to me that
this quest for knowledge
and this thirst for
knowledge we find
much more among women than men?
Now, guys, I'm not saying
guys don't do this.
>> They do.
>> Because they do.
>> But it's different.
Yes, we have two different
lessons in this life,
I believe.
It's been my experience.
I don't ask you to believe this.
It's just been my experience,
and I'll tell you what it is.
I think that this Earth is
truly a female sort of energy.
And a scientist will say what
in the world do you mean.
I think the women
relate to the earth.
I think women not
going out and working
in the past several hundreds
of years, thousands of years,
have probably had
the opportunity
to protect their inner
life a little more.
Men, on the other hand, have
had to go out right away.
>> Fascinating.
>> They've had to go out
and make their mark in life.
They've had to make money.
They've had to deal with those
incredibly difficult problems.
Women have not had to
do that until lately.
Now, we're getting heart
attacks just like men.
>> Sure, stress--
>> We are developing the same
diseases of stress that men
have had.
The problem is that
women in the world
are very different
than men in the world.
We have different problems--
a different set of problems.
I think women are still
deeper in the sense
of their own intuition, perhaps.
I think the dark
side of the soul--
I wrote a book
called "Dark Sister."
And what that was
about was someone
who had been seduced by the
darkness, by a dark sorcerer.
Now, to me, darkness is not
only that kind of an energy,
but it is also the
unexpressed intuitional sides
of our nature.
In other words, if you
have impulses, emotions
that you don't express
because of the kind of society
that we live in, you
are going to develop
a dark side of some kind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Do you not find,
though, more and more,
that the things that
we used to say--
that's woo woo-- are
very, very modern, today.
>> Very mainstream.
>> But you'll notice that when
people are speaking mainstream,
there are a few artists today
that are very mainstream that
are talking about healing
the body with the mind.
They are very, very tutored
and careful to use languaging
that is acceptable to anybody.
They don't get into
auras and energy fields.
>> Yet.
>> Not yet.
They're talking about
it, and they're very much
involved in it.
But what they are
saying to you or to me
is hold your thought
patterns in a certain way.
Don't think that you can
live with negative thoughts
and not have it
affect your body.
>> I see.
>> That's a different
way of expressing it.
>> I think of you, as do so
many other people in this world,
as a pioneer in this field.
Being a pioneer
in this field, I'd
be very interested to know
the changes that you have seen
in the way society looks
at your kind of work,
in the way women have
changed and are changing.
What do you look at
today and you say, boy,
they weren't doing
that back then?
>> Well, first of all, we never
talked about spirituality.
It was the one thing that
drove me out of Beverly Hills
and into the vast
wilderness of Canada.
Why would I leave
the life that I
was leading to go work with
two very elder native women?
Everybody forgets
that they're elders.
>> I remember.
People thought you were nuts.
>> Oh, they did.
>> People thought you were nuts.
>> What are you doing?
And why?
And I would say because there
is more life than what we're
doing right now, than going and
get our getting our hair done
and talking about the next
movie that's coming down,
and so forth and so on.
I mean, it's a wonderful life.
There's nothing wrong with
the life I was leading.
I, just for me, had
a destiny that I
felt I had to understand.
>> And if I may point out that
the same people who said, boy,
Lynn, you are crazy, are
the people today who want
the quality that you have.
>> Yes, they do.
And the wonderful,
wonderful thing about that
is that they're willing
to do the work that it
takes to change.
I think what happens
is that we think we
can get instant enlightenment.
We can go to a seminar
or two and learn
what it takes to
become a quote unquote
"enlightened woman,"
which is a much
misused word, incidentally.
In English, we
don't have the words
to talk about the transformation
into spiritual life.
In the native
languages, they all
talk about it
constantly, because it's
part of their whole life.
We go to church on Sunday
to have our little ceremony.
We don't have spirituality
that is part of every waking
moment of our life.
>> I think you're right.
We are talking more about
spirituality these days
in circles where you would have
never thought you would hear.
>> That's right.
>> How does that manifest
in change, in people,
in the workplace, in public?
How are we, as a--
dare I say something as lofty
as "as a nation," as a country,
how are we changing?
How do you see it?
>> Well, we're changing
our mirrors for one thing.
We are, as women, certainly
daring to create acts of power
in our life.
I learned very early on that
you have to find the teacher
inside of you.
And you can find that teacher,
because you've already
got the knowledge.
You just have got
to open up to it.
Somebody inside of
you has been trying
to talk to you your whole life.
And I think that's
what we found.
We have found that in
speaking to each other,
listening to seminars, reading
books that are truly written
with consciousness-- you can
tell the difference between
a spiritual book that has no
consciousness whatsoever--
it's kind of a how-to book--
as compared to something that
is written from an experience
that someone has had.
I really think there's
a vast difference.
>> Yes, there is.
>> And one's more academic,
and one is more of the heart.
And when people are
speaking from their hearts,
you're going to learn something
in the workplace, everywhere.
>> And we are.
>> Yeah.
People are expressing
themselves,
and they're talking about things
that make their work better.
It's not a bad thing to
talk about spirituality.
I think before, we
were very enamored
with organized religions.
We were very careful not to
step past those boundaries.
And I think now,
even the churches
are opening to different
kinds of ceremonies,
allowing maybe a woman to
preach as well as a man,
realizing that the spirituality
comes through everyone
in different ways.
When I first began this
work, first of all,
I was a woman,
which was a no-no.
So a woman putting her
head above the crowd
was the most
difficult experience.
Had they warned me
about that, I don't
know if I would have done it.
>> It makes me happy that
they didn't warn you,
because you have set
a standard for us.
>> But everybody, I mean
ex-boyfriends, so forth,
took pot shots at me, tried
to destroy me, literally.
And I have seen it
throughout history.
Women writers in
particular, but people
who try to become powerful in
a way that is freeing for not
only other women, but for men--
look at the difference if
a woman has her freedom
and works hard in the
world at what she loves.
It allows a man to have all
the freedom in the world,
because there aren't all these
people dependent upon him,
pulling him down, and making
him fit into a little groove
that maybe he's not enjoying.
I think that all of this
spiritual freedom, I guess,
for want of a better
way of explaining it,
has helped everybody.
I think it's helped
men, it's helped
women find a way
of living that is
more expressive and
certainly happier, more
fulfilling in some way.
I think before, people
were so stressed,
and so unhappy, and so
separated from one another.
As this movement seems to go
forward, people are sharing.
They're friends
before they even meet,
because they realize that we're
all part of the same fabric.
>> Yes, we are.
I think you just coined a
new term, spiritual freedom.
It's a word I will use, and
I will give you full credit.
Thank you so much for
visiting with me, today.
I just love talking to you.
>> It is such a pleasure,
and thank you for giving us
a chance to do that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, this is a wheel
for healing hatred.
I'm not saying that this is you.
This is a wheel for healing
self, and healing self-hatred,
and hatred in the world.
But you have to always
start with self.
You always have to
start with home.
Isn't that the truth?
So what you do is you sit-in
the center of the wheel,
and you face the south.
And the south is always
physicalness or substance.
If you were going to
transform this wheel
into a wheel for whatever
your endeavor is in life
or for healing yourself,
you would sit in the center.
You would look
towards the south,
towards your physicalness.
What do I physically
feel about a situation?
Maybe you're looking
at a new job.
What do I physically feel
about taking this new job?
What does it do to me?
How is it going to
affect my physicalness?
Am I ready?
Have I done my homework?
Am I prepared physically?
For the wheel of
hatred, however,
a person who is in
hatred physically
feels like an outsider.
Enlightenment only happens
in movement from north
to south, south to north.
But most people live in
east-west, west-east--
what I think about
what you feel,
what I feel about
what you think.
And they meet in the
physical less and less,
and they make love.
Then they take out the garbage,
and they pay the bills.
What's left out of that circle?
Spirit.
If your relationship
is wobbling,
that's probably what
is happening, if you
will look at it carefully.
So you want to look at how to
bring spirit into your life.
How many times do you
go out in nature a day?
Not just a year.
During the weekend?
With the kids, when
you can't enjoy it?
When do you go with your mate?
When do you go with that
person and commune and pray?
[MUSIC PLAYING]